SOG 7.7 Carbon Monoxide Incidents

Carbon Monoxide Incidents

Carbon monoxide (CO) is an odorless, tasteless, colorless gas that is deadly. It is a by-product of
a fuel burning process. Many appliances such as furnaces, kitchen stoves, hot water heaters,
automobiles, and etc. can produce carbon monoxide. When a faulty or unusual condition exists,
carbon monoxide may be vented into areas where people are present. Carbon monoxide
poisoning may be difficult to diagnose, its symptoms are similar to the flu, which may include
headache, nausea, fatigue and dizzy spells.

Arrival on Scene
A. Perform a scene size up and establish Command.
B. Attempt to locate the homeowner or responsible party and begin to gather information as
to the hazard, potential victims, etc.
C. Evacuation and treatment of occupants are the first priority.

Scene Safety
A. Establish hot, warm, and cold zones (utilize barrier tape and natural boundaries if
necessary)
B. Ensure that unauthorized/untrained personnel do not enter the hazardous area

Incident Actions
A. The CO meter should be activated outside of the structure to allow for fresh air
calibration.
B. Personnel shall use the CO meter and perform an initial CO level survey. The meter shall
be used to survey the premises and verify the presence of carbon monoxide.
C. Personnel shall enter with protective clothing and self-contained breathing apparatus
(SCBA)
D. If, at any time during the survey phase, the meters indicate a concentration of CO in
excess of 20 ppm, or Oxygen by volume of less than 19.5%, then the survey team shall
actively go on air
E. Personnel shall initiate a primary search or verify that all occupants are outside of the
structure.
F. If occupants are showing signs of CO exposure, have EMS personnel treat them per their
protocols and transport.
G. Personnel should determine if the residential CO detector is in the low battery mode or
alarm mode.
1. A reading of 9 PPM or less does not require the evacuation of the premises:
a. Recommend the occupant, check their CO detector per
manufacturer recommendations.
b. Attempt to reset the detector.
c. Inform occupants that if detector activates again, call 911. 2. Any reading above 9 PPM but less than 100 PPM shall be considered above
normal, and potentially dangerous to the occupants:
a. Recommend that all occupants leave the premises and begin
ventilation.
b. Determine the source of the CO and shut down the appliance.
c. Once the premises have been reduced to a safe level of CO, the
premises may be occupied at the discretion of the occupant.
d. Attempt to reset the detector
e. Inform occupants that if the detector activates again, call 911. f. Inform the occupants of the actions that have taken place and that
they should notify the appropriate resources for assistance
3. Emergency Operations Reading of 100 PPM or greater:
a. Order the occupants to leave the premises immediately.
b. Determine the source of the carbon monoxide and shut down the
appliance.
c. Call for the Utility/Gas Company to respond to the scene if necessary
d. Ventilate the structure and reduce CO to a safe level.
e. Once the carbon monoxide level is safe the structure may be
occupied at the discretion of the occupant.
f. Inform the occupants of the actions that have taken place and they
should notify the appropriate resources for assistance