SOG 7.8 Confined Space Rescue

Confined Space Rescue

Definitions
Confined space: A confined space is any area or vessel, which meets all 3 of the following:
1. Is large enough and so configured that an employee can enter and perform work
2. Has limited means of entry or exit
3. Is not designed for continuous occupancy

Permit required confined space: A permit required confined space is defined as a confined space
which has one or more of the following:
1. Contains or has a potential to contain a hazardous atmosphere
2. Contains a material with potential for engulfment
3. Is so structured that an entrant could become trapped or asphyxiated
4. Contains any other recognized serious safety or health hazard – i.e. moving
parts, noise

Recovery mode: Recovery mode is defined as situations where the victim is obviously expired or
after a period of time during the rescue operation where time, conditions, or other factors have
reduced the chance for the victim’s survival to minimal.

Rescue mode: Rescue mode is defined as situations where the victim is believed or known to be
alive. If this is unknown, personnel should operate in the rescue mode until time, conditions, or
other elements make the chance for survival minimal.

Confined space rescue operations present a significant danger to fire department personnel. The
safe and effective management of these operations requires special considerations and
resources. Examples of possible confined spaces includes tunnels, sewers, tanks, process
vessels, manholes, storm drains, furnaces, silos, and industrial spaces.

The Fire Department functions at the AWARENESS level. Therefore it is the policy of
the Fire Department that personnel SHALL NOT enter into a confined space. Entry is
considered to have occurred as soon as any part of an entrant’s body breaks the plane of
an opening into the space.

Examples of activities and functions appropriate at the AWARENESS level include:
- Recognition of a confined space incident
- Recognition of confined space hazards
- Performing a non-entry retrieval
- Identifying resource needs
- Initiating response of operations and/or technician level personnel
- Establishing scene control and management

Arrival On Scene
A. A. The first-in unit should position the apparatus appropriately
B. The first arriving officer should establish command and complete an initial size-up
including:
1. Secure any witnesses
2. Obtain the confined space entry permit and any other available information
3. Location, number, condition of victims, and length of time in confined space
4. Utility and other scene hazards – i.e. hazardous materials, low oxygen levels
5. Type of work being performed in the confined space
6. Type of PPE being used by victim(s)
7. Determination of rescue or recovery mode
8. Determination of additional resources needed
Scene Safety
A. Establish hot, warm, and cold zones (utilize barrier tape and natural boundaries)
B. Ensure that unauthorized/untrained personnel do not enter the confined space
C. Confirm or implement lock out/tag out

Incident Actions
A. If victim is attached to a body harness and retrieval line, the rescuers may lift the victim
from the confined space area
B. Attempt to establish contact with victim(s)
C. Establish atmospheric monitoring
D. Establish ventilation of confined space after atmospheric monitoring
E. If safe to do so and if it can be accomplished from outside the confined space, shutdown
non-essential equipment that is located within the confined space
F. Establish staging area for additional arriving apparatus and personnel