SOG 7.5 Hazardous Materials

Hazardous Materials

The Fire Department functions at the AWARENESS level. At the operations level, we
possess the basic knowledge necessary to protect the public from harm due to the exposure of
hazardous materials. Prior to responding to a known or suspected hazardous materials incident,
all personnel shall have Hazardous Materials training at the awareness level.

An incident involving hazardous materials can pose significant risk to the public and responding
personnel. While all effort shall be made to protect the public, responders must NOT rush into the
incident. Many HAZMAT incidents require the assistance, involvement, and response of other
agencies; as such, mitigating the incident can take an extended period of time. All actions shall
be based on informed decisions from qualified individuals.

Examples of activities and functions appropriate at the AWARENESS level include:
- Recognition of a Hazmat incident
- Recognition of hazards
- Identifying resource needs
- Initiating response of operations and/or technician level personnel
- Establishing scene control and management

Arrival on Scene
A. The Emergency Response Guidebook (ERG) shall be used to identify containers,
chemicals involved, staging, and isolation zones.
B. All units shall stage a safe distance away from the incident in accordance to ERG
recommendations and current conditions. When selecting a staging area take into
consideration the following: Wind direction, topography, accessibility, proximity to the
incident, overhead obstacles, and potential for fire.
C. The first arriving officer should establish command and complete an initial size-up
D. Isolate the incident from all directions and evacuate as needed. Refuse admittance to the
area. Note: In some situations, sheltering-in-place may be the most viable option.
E. All persons who have been exposed to the material(s) shall be moved to a location where
they are isolated from others and the incident so that they may be monitored and
decontaminated if necessary.
F. Obtain Safety Data Sheets and any chemical information available. This may include a,
waybill, manifest, or other form of shipping papers if the incident involves the
transportation of hazardous materials.
G. Make contact with any company representatives and notify the appropriate agencies
including a Wisconsin Level I HAZMAT Technician team if necessary.
H. Assign an incident safety officer immediately. It is also suggested that the incident
commander assign an assistant or scribe to begin documentation of all incident plans and
operations.
Scene Safety
A. Establish hot, warm, and cold zones (utilize barrier tape and natural boundaries)
B. Ensure that unauthorized/untrained personnel do not enter the hazardous area

Incident Actions
A. All incident actions shall not exceed the scope of the hazardous materials operations
level which is limited to establishing command, identifying the materials involved,
isolating the incident, and securing the scene. Other actions may occur only if the
personnel have the appropriate level of PPE and training to SAFELY carry out the tasks
associated with his/her assignments.
B. An Incident Action Plan shall be created that identifies exposures, hazards, and incident
objectives.
C. Dike and/or dam areas to contain run-off and prevent further contamination of other areas
and water sources.
D. Remove all ignition sources if materials are combustible or flammable in nature.
E. Collaborate with the DNR, EPA, County Officials, company representatives,
specialists/technicians, and the HAZMAT team as needed.
F. Communications and accountability of all incident personnel shall be maintained at all
times.

Reports and Documentation
A. The release of information regarding the incident shall be controlled by the OIC and the
designated Public Information Officer. Only the OIC, County Emergency
Management, or other designated Public Information Officer shall have the authority to
provide public information.
B. The Incident Action Plan and all operations performed on the incident shall be
documented. A written report shall be completed by the OIC and filed with all other
documents created.
C. A log of all department personnel who were exposed or potentially exposed shall be
maintained during the incident and filed along with other incident reports.
D. A record of all other agencies and their corresponding personnel who responded shall
also be kept.
E. A record of all items used that will need to be replaced and any other expenses shall be
kept during the incident and filed with the other incident reports.

Clean-Up
Clean up of materials is the sole responsibility of the person or company responsible for the
hazardous material(s) incident. All of the personnel and equipment in contact with the hazardous
material(s) shall be decontaminated prior to returning to service.