SOG 7.6 Natural Gas Incidents

Natural Gas Incidents

Natural gas (Methane) is extremely flammable, colorless, odorless, and lighter than air.
Mercaptan, with an odor of rotten eggs, is added to natural gas to help indicate its presence. The
flammable range of natural gas is 4% Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) to 15% Upper Explosive Limit
(UEL) by volume. Natural gas can displace oxygen and cause asphyxiation in certain settings,
particularly confined spaces. The presence of natural gas in its flammable range should be
evaluated with the use of a Combustible Gas Indicator (CGI) (on the Engine, Utility Company, or
HAZMAT response unit.)

Fires involving natural gas should be controlled by stopping the flow of gas. In most cases,
burning natural gas should not be extinguished as this would change the situation from a visible
to an invisible hazard with an explosive potential. Natural gas is much lighter than air and will
usually dissipate rapidly in the outside environment. Inside buildings, however, it tends to pocket,
particularly in attics and dead space. Because natural gas is lighter than air, if confined it has the
potential for a catastrophic explosion. Natural gas leaks above ground are much easier to
manage than below ground leaks.

Arrival on Scene
A. Perform a scene size up and establish Command.
B. The Emergency Response Guidebook shall be used to identify staging and isolation
zones.
C. Consciously avoid committing apparatus or personnel to a dangerous situation or a
situation that could become dangerous due to gas migration.
D. Attempt to locate the homeowner or responsible party and begin to gather information as
to the hazard, potential victims, etc.
E. Notify appropriate Utility/Gas Company and HAZMAT(if needed) for assistance and
response
F. Evacuate the area, working towards an “All Clear” of the immediate area and surrounding
structures if necessary.
G. Isolate the area/scene – Establishment of a “Hot Zone” is critical.
H. Deny entry.
I. If incident is determined to be a natural gas leak, ensure that personnel safety practices
are in place when working in the Hot Zone including the wearing of the appropriate PPE
with SCBA, face piece donned and breathing air. Establish a water supply and ensure
that a charged hose line is in place. This line must be attended when Utilty/Gas Company
or HAZMAT personnel are securing the leak.
J. Approach to the incident should be from upwind. Use wind speed/direction from dispatch
and observe any on-scene indicators (trees, flags and any other items that may show
direction).

Scene Safety
A. Establish hot, warm, and cold zones (utilize barrier tape and natural boundaries)
B. Ensure that unauthorized/untrained personnel do not enter the hazardous area

Incidents with an Explosion- Incident Actions
Units arriving on scene of an explosion must consider natural gas as a possible cause.
Underground leaks may allow gas to travel considerable distances before entering a structure
through the foundation, around pipes or through void spaces. Until it can be determined that the
area is safe from danger of further explosions:
A. Evacuate all civilians
B. Keep the number personnel in the area to the minimum number necessary to stabilize
the situation
C. Don’t rely on gas odor- Use a CGI to check all suspected areas
D. Check areas systematically using a CGI- Start outside of the area of the explosion and
move into the area until readings indicate a detectable concentration.
E. Map the readings for the affected area and relay it to Command
F. If the gas concentration is encountered inside, adjacent to, or underneath any building,
secure all possible sources of ignition in the affected area.
G. Cut electricity from outside the affected area to avoid arcing.
H. Ventilate buildings where gas is found with explosion-proof blowers only.
I. Never enter inside when CGI is alarming for LEL.
J. Ventilate first and wait for Utility/Gas Company or HAZMAT.
K. Command shall provide for effective interaction between gas company personnel and the
fire department.
L. Command must ensure the safety and stability of the structure.

Incidents with No Explosion- Incident Actions
Calls for “gas leak”, gas odor”, “broken gas line” and similar situations may range from minor to a
potentially major incident. All these should be approached as potentially dangerous situations.
The following actions must occur:
A. The first arriving unit with a CGI shall obtain a sufficient number of gas concentration
readings for Command to evaluate the hazard and take appropriate action. (With these
readings, a proper isolation perimeter can be established.)
B. In all cases, personnel shall take whatever actions are necessary to provide for life safety
and property conservation.
C. Provide standby protection with a charged 1-3/4 inch hand line (fog nozzle) and a dry
chemical extinguisher.
D. Crews shall be in full protective equipment and SCBA.
E. Crews should position themselves upwind.
F. Evacuate any civilians in the area of escaping gas.
G. Attempt to locate the source of the gas and any shutoff devices available to isolate and
control the leak, i.e. water heater, stove, dryer, etc.