SOG 7.10 Water Rescue

Water Rescue

Arrival on Scene
A. The Officer will provide a scene size-up, assume command, develop a plan, and call for
additional technical rescue mutual aid units as needed.
B. The Officer will secure a responsible party or witness.
C. The Officer will determine if the operation will be a “Rescue” or “Recovery.”
D. The Officer will ensure that a communication system has been coordinated for all
activities.
E. The Rescue Team (Consisting of members trained in water rescue operations) will:
a. Assume rescue/recovery operations control.
b. Identify hazards and critical factors.
c. Develop a plan and back-up plan.
d. Communicate with resources.
e. Inform command of conditions, actions and needs during all phases of the
operation.

Scene Safety
A. Make the General Area Safe.
a. Establish a Hazard Zone Perimeter.
b. Keep all non-essential personnel out of the hazard zone.
c. Remove all non-essential civilians from the hazard zone.
B. A Designated Safety Officer must be assigned for the scene.
a. Identify hazards present and if possible, have them secured.
b. Notify personnel of hazards (volume, velocity, water temperature, floating
debris, unusual
drop offs, hydraulic effects, depth of water, inclement weather, etc.)
C. Assign Personnel Up Stream that can notify Command and the Rescue team of any
upstream hazards that may affect the operation.
D. Assign Personnel Down Stream that can throw ropes or watch for rescue personnel or
victims that maybe washed downstream. *Personnel working near the water’s edge must
wear appropriate PPE/PFD
E. Assemble all necessary personnel, equipment, and patient packaging equipment that will
be required for the rescue operation according to the action plan.

Incident Actions
A. The Rescue Plan. Rescue plans should be conducted from low risk to high risk order.
a. TALK- If the water is calm or slow moving, try to talk the victim into self-rescue
if possible
b. REACH- Extend an arm, pike pole, rescue hook, or any other such object to
reach the victim and pull them from the water.
c. THROW- Attempt to throw the victim a throw-bag rescue line or some other
type of approved safety flotation device and “pendulum-belay” or “haul” the victim
to the bank.
d. ROW- If it is determined that a boat-based operation shall be utilized, Mutual
Aid must be called. Command and the Mutual Aid responding Technical Rescue
Team will establish an action plan involving the use of boat-based operations,
anchors, and rope systems.
e. GO- If it is not possible to ROW to the victim, although very high risk, putting a
rescuer(s) in the water can be considered. Only rescuers with proper water
rescue training, PPE/PFD, and equipment may enter the water. Prior to
entering the water, the rescuer(s) must discuss the action plan, including specific
tasks and objectives, hazards, emergency procedures, and alternate plans. The
rescuer(s) shall never be attached to a life line without the benefit of a quick
release mechanism. The rescuer(s) should take at the least a PFD to the victim.
The rescuer(s) shall not do a breath-hold surface dive in an attempt to locate a
victim beneath the surface of the water.
f. HELO- Helicopter operations are considered high-risk and shall be decided
upon proper consultation with local law enforcement, dispatch, and appropriate
authorities. Command must also determine that a rescue-qualified pilot is
available for the rescue operation. If so, the Pilot will have the final say on, if and
how, the helicopter will be used in the rescue operation.
B. Assess the Victim
a. When the rescuer(s) reach the victim, a primary survey shall be completed.
Assess Airway, Breathing, Circulation, and exact method of entrapment.
b. If the victim is conscious, rescuer(s) should determine if the victim can assist in
the rescue.
c. If the victim is unconscious, the rescue must be completed as quickly as
possible.
d. If it has been determined that the operation has become an underwater
“recovery,” the operation shall proceed as a dive operation. A Mutual Aid
Technical Rescue Dive Team shall be called to perform the dive operation.
C. Treatment
a. Assist the victim to safety on shore and turn over to EMS/ALS for immediate
assessment.
b. Assist with initiating C-Spine precautions as soon as possible.
c. Assist with treating any life threating conditions.

Termination
A. Ensure personnel accountability.
B. Consider decontamination of victim(s) and rescuer(s.)
C. Recover all tools and equipment used in the rescue/recovery. In the cases of a fatality,
consider leaving everything in place until the investigative process has concluded.