SOG 7.4 Wildland Fires

Wildland Fires

Arrival on Scene
A. The Officer will provide a scene size-up, assume command, and develop a fire
suppression plan
B. The Officer will determine the location and size of the fire, direction and characteristics of
fire travel, the fuel burning, and exposures
C. The Officer will request additional resources as needed
D. The Driver/Operator will park the apparatus in a safe, accessible location pointing away
from the fire with the windows closed and the keys in the ignition
E. Consider evacuations of citizens

Scene Safety
A. All personnel should know the location and direction of the fire travel
B. Escape Plans shall be known to hall fire personnel
C. Be cautious for Spot fires
D. Be cautious for Flare-ups
E. Be aware of wind direction and velocity
F. Be aware of topography
G. Monitor crews for exhaustion
H. Be aware of down wires, electric fences, etc.
I. Be aware of equipment and personnel working above or around teams

Incident Actions
A. Base all actions and strategy on current and expected fire behavior
B. Establish staging area for additional arriving apparatus and personnel
C. Life safety and structural protection take priority over extinguishment of forest, brush, or
ground cover
D. If offensive attack is indicated, the head of the fire is to be attacked first. If that is not
possible, the flanks should be attacked while working toward the head of the fire.
E. If the fire is large and fast moving, then a direct attack may not be possible. In such
cases, an indirect and/or parallel attack may be utilized by creating a fire line a distance
ahead of the fire to halt the progress of the fire.
F. Different methods of attack may be used simultaneously according to the situation
G. Teams assigned to structural protection must keep hose lines flexible enough to be able
to quickly break away in the even of being over run
H. Collaborate with the DNR, County Officials, and specialists/technicians as needed
I. Communications and accountability of all incident personnel shall be maintained at all
times.